Mark Corey, 11/6/16

Optimal NBA Team Composition and relative player valuation


High level description of the project
o	Determine whether we can meaningfully cluster players NBA players by "type"
o	Use this info to determine whether there are optimal compositions of player types when forming teams and lineups?  If there are optimal compositions, we can potentially....
o	identify latent improvement opportunities for any team (eg new lineups to test, prioritization of players to pursue via free-agency or trade).
o	predict any player's value to any team.
o	determine whether optimal team/lineup compositions have changed over time.
o	determine whether new trends in team/lineup compositions are developing.

Outline of process
o	Identify player feature set and k value, and build player clusters.
o	Merge the resulting cluster labels with NBA's lineup data
o	Translate each lineup into appropriate cluster labels
o	Aggregate identical cluster combos
o	Index and sort the cluster combos by a weighted average of NetRating*
o	Determine statistical significance of the "best" cluster combos
o	Analysis
o	Understand the characteristic features of each cluster
o	Score players within clusters and use these rankings, along with the cluster rankings, to identify areas of opportunity for the teams
o	Look for patterns of changing composition over time and whether new patterns are emerging.

How are you presenting your work? (web app, visualization, presentation/slides, etc.)
Slide presentation, possible visualizations

What's your next step?
Continue working on web-scraping and begin building the initial clustering feature set.

Data Pipeline
o	The data is published on http://stats.nba.com/
o	I will be using this Python client for scraping the data off of NBA.com and reading it directly into DataFrames: https://github.com/seemethere/nba_py
o	Two general buckets of data:
o	Individual player data (still creating initial list)
o	Various offensive and defensive efficiency metrics (based on shot type and location on the court), various offensive and defensive volume/usage metrics, quickness and “hustle” metrics, and other player attributes like age, years in league, height, weight, “wingspan”.
o	This will data will be used for clustering players in order to generate a cluster label for each player.
o	Lineup data
o	Various offensive efficiency/volume and defensive metrics for every 5-man lineup (~250 per year/per team).  The data includes NetRating (see below), which can be used to compare performance across lineups.
o	After the clusters are created, cluster labels will be applied to players and then overlaid on top of this lineup data.  The resulting cluster combinations will then be aggregated.
o	I’ll then run statistical tests on this data to see if there are significant differences in performance between cluster combinations

o	Other notes on the data
o	A couple years ago the NBA started collecting and publishing SportsVU data which adds several valuable variables (eg  player quickness) that were previously not available to teams or the public.
o	In addition to player level and team level stats, the NBA has published detailed stats on every lineup used since the 2007-08 season.  Teams use an average of 250 different line ups per season.
o	*NetRating is a convenient single metric to measure lineup efficiency: the difference between the lineup's points scored per 100 possessions and its points allowed per 100 possessions.
o	As an example of the translation and aggregation steps, a lineup of Curry, Thompson, Green, Durant and Pachulia is translated to cluster combo A-B-C-D-E.  The net rating of this cluster combo is aggregated with all other A-B-C-D-E combos (eg the NetRating of the group weighted by the total minutes the group played together)

Anticipated Problems
o	High level of feature options could slow down progress
o	There are many potential feature options to be considered for the clustering step.  Understanding what to use, how many to use, and how/whether to weight them in terms of importance will be a very important step for generating the downstream results.
o	I’ll do a quick initial EDA and select a temporary set of features in order to move forward as soon as I can with a first clustering iteration.  Once I have the initial clusters, I’ll work on the process of overlaying these on top of lineups to create the cluster combinations, and then the process of assessing whether there are performance differences between the aggregated cluster combos
o	I’ll focus on iterations of feature selection after I’ve completed the above.

o	My hypothesis (that there are optimal lineup combinations of player types) might be wrong.
o	This would prevent me from building some of the analysis I’d like to include such as a ‘player prioritizer’ for each team that is based on player valuation unique to each team.
o	If I’m not able to find significance in the performance difference between different cluster combinations, I’ll focus my analysis on features creation and the optimization of the player clustering, and maybe try to come up with a notion of feature importance (eg tying different features to some single performance metric such as plus minus).

Expectations for the allotted timeframe
o	At a minimum, I expect to be able to create the player clusters, merge these with the lineup data, and run statistical analysis on this data.
o	The time I will need to dedicate to subsequent iterations of the model will depending on the results I get from the statistical analysis step.  If I don’t get significant results here, I will want to spend more time on feature creation/selection to.
o	In terms of presentation, at minimum I will present slides showing my process and insights.  My hope is that I will be able to take this a step further and show some of the applications of my insights, such as unique player value per team, or suggestions for improvement for each team.  A simple app to ‘productize’ this would be a nice addition, but I don’t want to focus on this until I’ve confirmed that I have time and it makes sense (ie the model works).

Repos, libraries, tools
o	Other than nba_py (mentioned above), I currently have no plans to use other libraries or repos.  I will cite this in my project presentation and repo.

Data examples
o	see warriors_15_16.to_csv for example of the lineup data.
o	see wiggins_shot_chart.csv for example of the player data for clustering (this is just a small set of possible features)
